DOC Add docs on napari models and events (#4929)
Napari/napari: docs/guides/napari_models.md

# Napari models and events

> This document explains the links between the three main components of napari:

Reviewer: Nice and clear explanation of the goal of the doc!

python models, Qt classes and vispy classes, with code examples. This knowledge
is not necessary to use napari and is more aimed at developers interested in
understanding the inner workings of napari. This document assumes you're
familiar with basic usage of napari.

The three main components:

> * python models describing objects - these are able to operate without the GUI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* python models describing components in the napari application - these are able to operate without the GUI
```

I think it might be nice to avoid "object" here to avoid confusion with programming concept.

Author: Thanks, this is better

python models, Qt classes and vispy classes, with code examples. This knowledge
is not necessary to use napari and is more aimed at developers interested in
understanding the inner workings of napari. This document assumes you're
familiar with basic usage of napari.

The three main components:

* python models describing objects - these are able to operate without the GUI
  interface and do not have any dependencies on user interface classes
    * this code lives in `napari/components` (utility objects) and
     `napari/layers` (objects that contain data)
* Qt classes that handle the interactive GUI aspect of the napari viewer
    * the private Qt code lives in `napari/_qt` and the smaller public Qt
      interface code lives in `napari/qt`
* vispy classes that handle rendering
    * the code for this is private and lives in `napari/_vispy`

The separation of the python models from viewer GUI code allows:

* analysis plugins to be developed without worrying about the GUI
  aspect
* napari to have the option to move away from the rendering backend currently
  used
* tests to be easily run headlessly
* the python models to be run headlessly (see

>   [Running napari headlessly](../howtos/headless.md) for more)

Author: Assumes #4955 has been merged

## Python models and events

Commonly, python models in napari are classes that store information about their
state as an attribute and are the "source of ground truth". When these
attributes are changed an "event" needs to be emitted such that relevant
observers of the model (such as other classes) can take the appropriate
action.

One way this is achieved in napari is via getters and setters. Let's take
for example the `Dims` class with a selected few attributes:

```python
from napari.utils.events import EmitterGroup

class Dims:
    """Dimensions object modeling slicing and displaying.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ndim : int
        Number of dimensions.
    ndisplay : int
        Number of displayed dimensions.
    ...
    """
    def __init__(self, ndim, ndisplay):

>         self._ndim_ = ndim

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        self._ndim = ndim
```

Trailing underscore.

        self._ndisplay = ndisplay

        # an `EmitterGroup` manages a set of `EventEmitters`
        # we add one emitter for each attribute we'd like to track
        self.events = EmitterGroup(source=self, ndim=None, ndisplay=None)

    # for each attribute, we create a `@property` getter/setter
    # so that we can emit the appropriate event when that attribute
    # is changed using the syntax: ``Dim.attribute = new_value``
    @property
    def ndim(self):
        """Number of dimensions."""
        return self._ndim

    @ndim.setter
    def ndim(self, value):
        self._ndim = value
        # emit the ndim "changed" event
        self.events.ndim(value=value)

    @property
    def ndisplay(self):
        """Number of displayed dimensions."""
        return self._ndisplay

    @ndisplay.setter
    def ndisplay(self, value):
        self._ndisplay = value
        # emit the ndisplay "changed" event
        self.events.ndisplay(value=value)
```

Another object can then "listen" for changes in our `Dims` model and register
a callback function with the event emitter of the attribute they would like
to watch:

```python
# create an instance of the model

> dims = Dims(ndim=3, ndisplay=2)
> 
> # define some callback that should respond to changes in the model
> def _update_display(self):
>     """
>     Updates display for all sliders.
>     """
>     # the code updating the display code is not relevant for this
>     # example thus has been ommited.
>     nsteps = self.dims.nsteps
>     print(f"Update number of dimensions displayed to {nsteps}")
> 
> # register our callback with the model
> dims.events.ndisplay.connect(_update_display)

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure which level you are targeting that for, but there is a number of implicit things in the black of code. There is a mix of standalone function and objects method. 
As `_update_display(...)` take self, then we can assume that this will be an object method.  Is mention  `self.dims.nsteps`, so I assume that `dims = Dims(...)` has m been assigned to the `self.dims` attribute, and thus I believe that `connect(_update_display)` should connect  to `self._update_display` somehow, otherwise the first argument that _update_displauy will get will be an `Event` with attributes like `source`, `value` ...

`nsteps` also don't exists on `Dims`.

```suggestion
dims = Dims(ndim=3, ndisplay=2)

# define some callback that should respond to changes in the model
# if the function takes a single parameter it will receive the event
# as first value. 
def _update_display(event):
    """
    Updates display for all sliders.
  
    """
    # the code updating the display code is not relevant for this
    # example thus has been omitted.
    
    # we can get the source object of the event, 
    assert event.source == dims 
    
    # ... and query any attributes
    ndisplay = event.source.ndisplay
    
    # ... or directly get the new value for this specific event:
    assert ndisplay == event.value
    print(f"Update number of dimensions displayed to {ndisplay}")

# register our callback with the model
dims.events.ndisplay.connect(_update_display)
```

Author: > There is a mix of standalone function and objects method.

Thanks, mostly I was trying to give an easy example from the napari code base but I realise now that it was a method and did not make sense how I had it.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, the new version reads much better IMHO, thanks a lot for doing all that.

* type validation and coercion on class instantiation and attribute assignment
* event emission after successful attribute assignment

Using `EventedModel` would reduce the above `Dim` class code to:

```python
class Dim(EventedModel):
    """Dimensions object modeling slicing and displaying.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ndim : int
        Number of dimensions.
    ndisplay : int
        Number of displayed dimensions.
    ...
    """
    ndim: float
    ndisplay: float
```

This `Dim` class will automatically emit an event when one of its attributes
changes. Other classes interested in the `Dim` class can register a callback
function that will be executed when an attribute changes.

```python
class DimsDependentClass():
    """A class that needs to 'do something' when Dims attributes change.

    Parameters
    ----------
    dims : napari.components.dims.Dims
        Dims object.
    ...

    Attributes
    ----------
    dims : napari.components.dims.Dims
        Dimensions object modeling slicing and displaying.
    ...
    """

    def __init__(self, dims: Dims):
        self.dims = dims
        self.dims.events.ndisplay.connect(self._update_display)

> ```

Reviewer 2: 👍

The separation of the python models from viewer GUI code allows:

* analysis plugins to be developed without worrying about the GUI
  aspect
* napari to have the option to move away from the rendering backend currently
  used
* tests to be easily run headlessly

There is also intention to allow the python model to be run headlessly (without
opening a napari GUI interface), which may be useful for example when performing
batch analysis.

Headless mode can be achieved by not showing the viewer:

```python
viewer = napari.Viewer(show=False)
# or
viewer_model = napari.components.ViewerModel()
```

Note that currently using `napari.Viewer(show=False)` will *not* prevent

> Qt to be imported *unless* QtPy or any of the Qt components is uninstalled.

Reviewer 3: The possible workaround for the problem of crashing the napari application on creating QAppliation is to set `QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen` in the environment. 

![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3826210/185050890-ba8e3860-346e-4b60-99e9-aa488f0a66c9.png)

I do not know if this will allow for proper render, for example, screenshots, but it should allow solving problems like #3686 or just make it possible to use on a server, the napari installation from conda.

Author: Hmm I am not sure this would be the best place for this information, though admittedly there are no docs on how to run napari headless...

Reviewer 3: Also here you add information that import Qt could be problematic without explanation why.

Author: Good point, I was mostly trying to summarise the info here: https://github.com/lucyleeow/napari/pull/7#discussion_r946160065

Note that I don't have a deep understanding of this. My guess would be if you are running in a CLI Qt may not work and crash?

Reviewer 3: The first command on sreenshot is the try of run napari (create viewer) on serwer without X. On try to create QApplication, if qt cannot connect to display then it print messages from terminal and abort application. And it will happen always on create viewer if qt libs are installed and default plugin is selected.

The environment variable told Qt backend that rendering should be done offscreen. So QApplication creating will end with success.

Author: Thank you that makes sense. I think I will add this info to a separate section in the docs (tips on running napari headless) as this info may be useful to users, whereas the rest of this doc is more aimed at people interested in contributing to napari. Also it doesn't seem to fit with the content of these docs. Thanks
